# Anabolics change the Microbiota and Reduces Symptoms of Gastrointestinal Disease?

Current thinking puts bacteria at the center of two prominent gastrointestinal diseases:  
Helicobacter pylori- peptic ulcer, and methane producing bacteria- Small Intestinal Bacterial overgrowth (SIBO). The addition of anabolic steroids in a manner to normalize the Free Androgen Index (FAI) correlates with symptomatic improvement in at least SIBO. Only on report in the medical literature has shown an improvement in Crohn’s Disease with added back testosterone. No one has connected that xeno-estrogenic effects of environmental toxins could be causing a relative testosterone/anabolic deficiency in gastro-intestinal disease. No one has looked at how changes in the hormonal milieu might affect the microfilaria in the gastrointestinal tract. This is important because the use of antibiotics is resulting in increased antibiotic resistance and greater than 30 percent treatment failures leaving patient suffers with SIBO and potentially H. Plyori without treatment options."  
  
"This hypothesis and observational cases disrupts the commonly held belief that bacteria are the cause of gastro-intestinal diseases and propagate autoimmune and related disease. These observations support the concept that endocrine disrupting chemicals (EDCs), environmental toxins in fact cause a change in the microbiota that could lead to bacterial overgrowth, autoimmune and related diffuse diseases such as SIBO and IBD. The aforementioned discussion clearly shows that the antibiotics prescribed for methane producing bacteria of SIBO, rifaximin and a multitude of others, are not effective for treating the symptoms, the observed hormonal disruption, and changes in transit time that are components of these disease complexes. **The host needs to stay anabolic to maintain the tight junction of enterocytes, the transit time must be maintained, and pathologic biota need to remain in the colon and not ascend to the small bowel.** All these conditions are necessary for the gastro-intestinal tract to maintain homeostasis. Should the shift from an androgenic to estrogen milieu occur because of increased exposure to EDCs,the Wolbachia/ microfilaria infections are hypothesized to increase, and they may be the unrecognized causative agents for SIBO and other gastrointestinal disease states."

1. https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/29150304/ 