The most enthusiastic reading of the hajnal line is that Christianity, capitalism, the nuclear family, liberal democracy, and outbreeding are inextricably linked. For better or worse, these are the core pillars which make up “The West” as we know it, which came to be in the 12th century after the Norman invasion solidified the cultural union of northern France, southern England, and western Germany, creating the incubation grounds for what we have come to call The West.

Most likely, if you are reading this, you probably think two or three of those core tenets are good ideas, while the other three or two need to be discarded with haste. If you are someone who likes all five, I genuinely don’t know how you wound up here.

Many on both the political left and the right have taken to fetishizing the parts of Europe that fall just outside the hajnal line, and appropriating their history into whatever modern day grievances they currently have against the respective core tenants of the hajnal line.

One example of this is Ireland. The left likes Ireland because it stood outside the hajnal line, outside The West proper and therefore outside the nuclear family and therefore colonialism, patriarchy and other things they like to complain about. The right likes Ireland, on the other hand, because the relatively modern violent rebellion against the English had overtones of ethnic solidarity, giving hope that the degraded tenets of the west, like outbreeding, can be resisted in the modern day, by a peoples native to Europe, as modern-day resistance to The West often comes from non-European peoples and is therefore too alienating for the right to truly embrace. One must understand that in both instances the principles being fought against *are inherent to The West as we moderns understand it* as many on the right see themselves as defenders of The West, while decrying its core tenets, liberal democracy being the most popular target. 

This gets replayed with any country in Europe that falls outside the hajnal line. The appeal of a country that is adjacent to, but not part of, “The West” proper is too good to pass up. The “what if” scenarios spark the imagination, and modern dissidents with modern grievances latch on and don’t let go. The Scots for example are notoriously clannish, and resisted both Roman and English rule for centuries. Eastern Europe gets credit for being “based” anti immigrant on the right while the left insists on incorporating them into their fantasies of matriarchal commune-driven excellence. In reality, these places are simply Not The West, But Could Have Been. The clannish nature that keeps out immigrants or capitalism or liberal democracy or whatever *is also what kept out The West*. 

Generally, perhaps it is inconsistent to rally against one core tenet of The West while holding the others dear to our heart, and see “based Hungary keeping out Muslims” is just as silly of a position to take as “based IRA fighting colonialist England” for someone in the modern American right. Dissidents of all flavors would be wise to heed the connection between the Christian church's zeal for outbreeding and the nuclear family’s role in shaping egalitarian liberal democracy, and avoid throwing the baby out with the bathwater so to speak, or at least be honest with themselves and commit to throwing the whole thing out, baby and all.

Notes:
1. Keep in mind I am speaking historically and generally, obviously by the late 1900s countries outside the hajnal line were subsumed into the total military and cultural dominance of The West as personified by the United States, but this is a historically recent development and not necessarily irreversible.
2. The author of the original blogpost takes a neo-Darwinist evopsych approach that I don’t think is really necessary to explain the outcomes, large scale institutional incentives are sufficient to explain the change in behavior. Or perhaps it selected for genes of people who are receptive to institution-mediated behavior changes. Hard to tell.