# Physical vs Informational Beings
Girls swing between being entirely physical and entirely informational beings. When you aren't taught where physical identity begins and ends, by your father, you become a girl who is bound to an informational state; and from this, inevitably condemn your body whilst identifying with God, who is another informational being. It's not BPD, it's your femininity feeling too comfortable in the safety of Heaven. Your body cannot find a home in this peace, and you feel involuntary disgust when you realize the only safety you know is as much a truth as it is a lie. And that's too much thinking for a girl, who should simply exist as a paragon of beauty. You become obsessed with the idea of purity. You reject the treasures of your body. You become less, because safety in Heaven is sufficient. You don't understand why it isn't working. It cripples your ability to connect with more than the idea of someone, and soonafter marks you as prey for men who crave your command more than your touch. They offer you escape from your body thru preoccupation with their spiritual disgrace. Tempting, persistent distractions, all of them. You're a dream girl, but it's a nightmare; being that you're more dream than girl. You begin to question your femininity. Emotions become the enemy, and numbness sustains the final tender of your delusion. All you wanted was love, but you never quite got it right. You never quite knew where it should belong. And now it's all wrong, and everyone is the enemy. Hollowed out in the chest. You ask yourself what you want to do next; as if you should decide: A girl only makes one decision, and it's who to marry as a loving bride. And it's not God. That's just proof of commitment. Proof that you won't let go. And, who are you? Which prize do you covet? You're the sum of every man you still trust, and it should not be none of them. It should be God at the least, and your husband at the most. He is a Host of hosts, and you are a host. And he will love you the most, so long as you demand it. So, demand it. Never spoken, but accepted through his touch. Through his art. Through his standards and sensibilities and pride and all of his conquests until you, are his bride. His final, bittersweet victory. Because after you, no prize is ever as sweet. And, from what you know of men, can you think of a prettier wound? That's what it means to take a woman to heart. To make her your secret art. And as textured as oil paintings tend to be, she will rend these words which were meant to be, "Touch, and feel that I am real". And, you are.